Voting Procedure Overview

1. Carrying Identity Documents
Electors must bring an identity document to the polling station. Acceptable forms include:

National Identity Card (NIC)
Valid passport
Valid driving license
Senior citizens’ identity card
Government pensioners’ identity card
Identity card issued to clergy
Temporary identity card issued by the Election Commission through the Grama Niladhari
It is also advisable to carry the official poll card for convenience. While not mandatory, it assists both the elector and poll staff.

2. First Officer Check
At the first checkpoint, the officer will examine the identity document (NIC, passport, driving license, clergy identity card, pensioners’ identity card, senior citizens’ card, or temporary card). The officer will compare the elector's face with the photograph on the document. If satisfied with the identity, the officer directs the elector to the next station.

3. Second Officer Check
The second officer will ask for the official poll card, locate the elector’s name in the electoral register, and verify the elector’s name aloud along with the serial number. If there are no objections, the elector proceeds to the next stage.

4. Applying Indelible Ink
The third officer will inspect the little finger of the elector's left hand and apply indelible ink. Electors refusing the ink application will not be allowed to vote. Afterward, the elector receives a ballot paper.

5. Voting in the Booth
With the ballot paper, the elector enters the voting booth to mark their vote for their chosen party or group. Electors can also mark preferences for candidates, limited to the number of candidates allowed, as indicated by their serial numbers. Finally, the ballot paper should be folded and deposited into the ballot box.


01. Presidential Elections Act No 15 of 1981

(a)  The date of nomination should be fixed by the Commission not less than 16 days and not more than twenty one days from the date of publication of the order of the Election Commission.

(b)  A date not less than 4 weeks and not more than 6 weeks from the date of nomination, should be fixed by the Commission as the date of poll.

 

02. Parliamentary Elections Act No 1 of 1981

(a)  The period of nomination and the date of poll are mentioned in the proclamation published by the President to dissolve Parliament.

 

03. Provincial Councils Elections Act No 2 of 1988

(a)  The Nomination period commences on the fourteenth day after the publication of the notice of nomination and expires at twelve noon on the twenty first day after the day of publication of such notice.

(b)  After accepting nominations if it is found that there is going to be a contested election is any administrative district, the Returning Officer publishes a notice of poll fixing a date falling on a Saturday not less than five weeks or more than eight weeks from the date of publication of the notice.

 

04.  Local Authorities Elections Ordinance (Ch.262)

            Nomination period commences on the fourteenth day after the date of publication of the notice by Returning Officer on the intention of an election and expires at twelve noon on the twenty first day after publication of such notice.

 

05.  Referendum Act No 07 of 1981

(a)  When the President declares by that a gazette notification referendum should be conducted by a the Election Commission should conduct the referendum on a date not less than 30 days after the declaration.

         The Election Commission takes action to fulfill dual objectives i.e conducting elections to select the President, Members of Parliament, members to the provincial councils and local authorities; and the preparation of the annual electoral register. As the Commission is engaged in implementing election laws and regulations it is generally viewed that the Commission is monotonous in its functions and it conducts stereotype activates without any change. New election laws were enacted with the introduction of the proportional representation system in the year 1978, and as a result, all elections turned to be one day affairs. Therefore the Election Commission has to be ready to undertake an election every 15 months. Political Parties, Candidates, public and civil organizations at all levels are keen in participating in the democratic election process because it is a basic requirement of democratic administration. It is therefore important to note that any step towards the development of electoral process is of national priority.

In addition, there are other Acts to facilitate the process.eg. Provincial Councils Act No 42 of 1987


